Turn Open Source Development service into SSOT for consortia (#1124)
2i2c-org/team-compass: services/open-source-development/index.md

(open-source-development:index)=

# Consortia for Open Source Development

Creating pathways for communities to share, learn, and collaborate helps us identify and develop enhancements that serve them all. This network effect is the core of 2i2c’s [theory of impact](https://compass.2i2c.org/organization/theory-of-impact/#our-theory-of-impact). 

We work with many community leaders 1-to-1. This lets us see both problems and wins that they share with other communities. However, these leaders only see _each other_ if we make introductions between one community with a problem, and another community who has already come up with a solution. 

Consortia give us a structure for collectively refining and prioritizing 2i2c roadmap work that multiple communities care about, working together to fund that work, and building many-to-many connections, so communities learn from each other. 

# What’s a consortium? 

## A consortium is:

- A network of stakeholders organized around a shared challenge or goal.   
- A way to ensure that solutions work for many kinds of stakeholders.  
- A way to join forces in design, development, and funding.

> And a consortium's shared goals are to build better solutions for all communities 2i2c serves, while collaborating and learning from each other.

Author: ```suggestion
And a consortium's shared goals are to build better solutions for all communities 2i2c serves, while collaborating and learning from each other. Together, we're able to fund and solve problems by sharing resources and expertise.
```

(open-source-development:index)=

> # Consortia for Open Source Development

Reviewer: Scope question: is this "How we use consortia to fund open source development" or is it "a specific consortium focused on open source development"?

Author: Thanks for the question - I intend this page to cover `How we use consortia to fund open source development`!

Creating pathways for communities to share, learn, and collaborate helps us identify and develop enhancements that serve them all. This network effect is the core of 2i2c’s [theory of impact](https://compass.2i2c.org/organization/theory-of-impact/#our-theory-of-impact). 

> Part of how 2i2c creates our network effect today is by working with community leaders 1:1, so we see their shared problems and wins, but they only see each other if we make introductions between one community with a problem they need solved and another community who has already solved that problem. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We work with many community leaders 1-to-1. This lets us see both problems and wins that they share with other communities. However, these leaders only see _each other_ if we make introductions between one community with a problem, and another community who has already come up with a solution. 
```

> Part of how 2i2c creates our network effect today is by working with community leaders 1:1, so we see their shared problems and wins, but they only see each other if we make introductions between one community with a problem they need solved and another community who has already solved that problem. 

Reviewer 2: Part of how 2i2c creates our network effect today is by working with community leaders one-to-one, enabling us to see understand their shared problems and their wins. But we can create even more value by connecting those same communities with each other, letting one community's problem benefit from another's solution.

> Introducing consortia gives us a structure for collectively refining and prioritizing 2i2c roadmap work that multiple communities care about, working together to fund for that work, and uilding many:many connections, so communities learn from each other. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consortia give us a structure for collectively refining and prioritizing 2i2c roadmap work that multiple communities care about, working together to fund that work, and building many-to-many connections, so communities learn from each other. 
```

> Introducing consortia gives us a structure for collectively refining and prioritizing 2i2c roadmap work that multiple communities care about, working together to fund for that work, and uilding many:many connections, so communities learn from each other. 

Reviewer 2: By introducing consortia, where we bring communities from our network together with shared challenges and goals, we now have a structure for collectively refining and prioritizing 2i2c's roadmap work to ensure it's tuned to what multiple communities deeply care about, working together to fund that work, and building many-to-many connections that let communities learn from each other.

# What’s a consortium? 

## A consortium is:

> A network of stakeholders organized around a unifying problem.   

Reviewer: I think these all need to be bullets (`- `) or they'll flow on the same line

> A network of stakeholders organized around a unifying problem.   

Reviewer 2: A network of stakeholders organized around a shared challenge or goal.

A way to ensure that solutions work for many kinds of stakeholders.  
A way to join forces in design, development, and funding.

## With an aim to:

Build better solutions for all communities 2i2c serves.   
Collaborate and learn from each other.

> 

Reviewer 2: Overcome funding and development challenges by sharing resources and expertise

> # How a consortium operates

Reviewer: Can we promote all these by one header level? I think that weird stuff happens in mystmd when you have multiple top-level headers (`#`) in the same doc

Author: > Can we promote all these by one header level? I think that weird stuff happens in mystmd when you have multiple top-level headers (`#`) in the same doc

If by promote you mean move one level down ('#' becomes '##') then yes, that does clean things up.

## Getting started. 

Each consortium starts with a shared problem or narrative, and a gathering of people. 

1. **Propose a shared problem.** This can be proposed by a 2i2c team member, or one or more community members. It most often emerges through discussions of the [2i2c roadmap](https://2i2c.org/roadmap/), where we recognize that several related initiatives serve a common narrative.  
   * **Initiatives:** Units of work that deliver value to open source communities, technology that 2i2c builds, or infrastructure for our services. Designed around a problem statement and a proposed solution. Resolved in weeks-\>months. These are how we plan and share the [2i2c roadmap](https://2i2c.org/roadmap/)  
   * **Narratives:** Stories of ongoing need for a large class of users or communities. Forms the basis of a consortium. Useful for funding pitches and grant-writing. Designed as a thread that ties multiple initiatives. Resolved in months-\>years.  

>    * So far we have one consortium, organized around one narrative: [Optimize cloud spend on commercial cloud vendors](https://github.com/2i2c-org/narratives/issues/4)   

Reviewer: Let's put this in a follow-up section like "list of current consortia" and list this first one there?

>    * So far we have one consortium, organized around one narrative: [Optimize cloud spend on commercial cloud vendors](https://github.com/2i2c-org/narratives/issues/4)   

Reviewer 2: This is repeated in line 44

       
2. **Get critical mass.** Find enough other people who agree with the problem statement and are willing to participate in meetings about it.  
3. **Meet to define goals.** Have a meeting with coalition members to refine the problem, and decide if there’s enough interest in moving forward.

## Running the consortium

Once a consortium has kicked off, each member community participates in our planning ceremonies and gets the same updates on our work together, although they may contribute in different ways. 

> ### **How we communicate**

Reviewer: Don't need bold text for headers, they'll get their own style anyway

We currently have one active consortium, the Cloud Cost Optimization Consortium. 

* Consortia typically have a live (virtual) meeting quarterly to set priorities and demo recently completed work.  
* Each consortium has a guide doc. Today that’s in Google Docs; you can find the [Cloud Cost Consortium’s README](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_447531g-zozFRrJKXZz9x6hfafYzhe_djsCOqQ4dSQ/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.7g1kmdukb6vh) in our Drive.   

> * We use \#consortium-cloud-cost on Slack to share quick updates and requests, and as an open space for asynchronous discussion.   

Reviewer: link it? https://2i2c.slack.com/archives/C0B25UEJETB

* We use email updates to send requests (for letters of support, co-proposals, user feedback on features) and demo reels of work in progress.  
* When the consortium members are interested, we’ll try to organize in-person gatherings, typically as part of a conference where many member communities will already be present. 

### **Roles consortium members play**

Each member community in a consortium is expected to contribute in at least one of the following:

> 1. React & prioritize \- Tell us what did or did not resonate in our most recent demo, weigh in on priorities   

Reviewer: you shouldn't need to escape a `-` character

Reviewer: I'd recommend bolding the first word - e.g. `**React & prioritize**`

### **Co-proposing**

Member communities seeking grant funding themselves can add 2i2c as a subawardee or collaborator. We encourage consortium members to include initiatives from our roadmap in their proposals, and we can support them with estimates and co-writing. 

### **Co-funding**

When a community (or several communities) has funds they can direct towards open source development \- either specific initiatives/features they wish to “buy” or wider sustenance of the Jupyter ecosystem, they work with our Product and Business Development teams to describe and plan the work.   

## What’s the difference between membership with 2i2c and joining a consortium? 

Membership focuses on the core support 2i2c provides a specific community:

- Strategic guidance and advice around the Jupyter ecosystem  
- Direct support from 2i2c via [support@2i2c.org](mailto:support@2i2c.org)  
- Infrastructure hosting for (not every member community uses our infrastructure, but most do)  
- Consortia-related development will still roll-out to any member communities

> Consortium adds connection 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consortium adds more connection between communities, a deeper focused on a particular area, and a vehicle for raising additional funds to do the work 
```
